---
title: "Would you be so kind..."
---

In my very first evaluation that I received from my students here in the US I saw this comment:
***she is very straightforward***.

I wasn’t sure what that meant. <!--more-->At first I thought it was just a language thing: I didn’t
have a large vocabulary during my first year of doctoral study, so teaching was often difficult.
Sometimes I wasn’t sure how to explain a concept, sometimes I didn’t know how to ask a question, or
make a comment, or ask students to do this or that – using the right, appropriate words. These
things seem simple enough, but for me they were not simple, especially during my first semester of
teaching in a new country.

Very straightforward. Was I not polite enough? I certainly didn’t mean to. In my next semester I
tried to use words like <span class="ic4f-highlight">"could you please"</span>, or <span
class="ic4f-highlight">"would you like"</span> more often. However, another problem came about: now
every time before asking students to do something I had to think about how to ask them. Since I was
still working on improving my English (and still working!), that took some serious effort! But it
seemed like I was solving the problem.

Today it is easier for me to talk to my students. I am much more comfortable answering their
questions, helping them when they are wrong and encouraging them when they are right. I know I try.
However, when it comes to giving them specific feedback on grading, my hard times return.

I thought about this over and over, trying to understand the roots of the problem. I think it cannot
be just language.

Maybe it’s a culture thing? After all, I’m from another country. I recalled the time when I was a
professor in my native country and realized that I never worried about how to communicate with my
students. And here’s why: the important thing was the amount of knowledge the professor had. The
amount of knowledge meant authority; how to share that knowledge with the students was secondary.
And overall, the teaching process was more strict: students didn’t have much freedom; they didn’t
change advisors, committees, research topics, or their majors very easily – if at all. That must
have reflected on the way professors talked to students and how students talked – or, better,
listened – to their professors.

But I think there’s something else – not just using the right words. After all, memorizing the words
I should (or shouldn’t) use with students didn’t really help much. So here’s my “big idea”: I think
the words reflect how I see myself, my status – comparing to how I see the status of my students,
and what I think of them. Do I think that I know everything on a given topic much better than they
will ever know; and does this give me a special right to talk to them from this position of
superiority? Or do I think of them as future colleagues who just happen to be studying what I had
studied earlier, and maybe later some of them will know this subject deeper than I do – after it
becomes their research area? Essentially, it is a question of respect: the more I respect my
students – the easier it is for me to talk to them. Even when I need to provide detailed feedback on
harsh grading. Because I think that, for them, obtaining such feedback is very much like, for me,
obtaining feedback from my professors on my own research: they always want me to change this or
that, but I also know they want to help me and they want me to succeed. Right?

And thus, the problem of finding the right words slowly went away. But I still need to work on my
vocabulary.
