---
title: "The board is your friend! (part 2)"
---

I liked the idea of <a href="{% post_url 2012-12-17-the-board-is-your-friend %}">writing a lab flow
on the board</a> so much, that soon I started to add “Next lab assignment” rubric as well. As I
usually need all space on the board during the lab, <!--more--> I’ve decided to write a homework
assignment for the next lab in the right top corner of the board. I never need that space, whereas
my students always know where to find the assignment.

<img src="{{ '/assets/content/blog/board2.jpg' | relative_url }}" class="border-0 img-fluid mx-auto d-block">

I started writing the assignment soon after a few students asked me several times about the
homework. It was an unexpected question for me; usually all assignments are posted on the course
webpage and are listed in the student’s lab manual along with all deadlines. I thought maybe it
would be helpful if I would remind them every time what they should focus on for their homework:
things such as, for example, reading chapter 3, pre-lab for week 2, bring your computers/textbooks
etc.

Again, I’ve found this to be helpful for students: they can ask more specific questions about the
homework before they actually start doing it at home. Also, I’ve noticed that a few students from
time to time started doing their homework in class. It was the students who finished the lab earlier
than the rest of the class and didn’t want to waste the remaining time.

It made me think that they considered the “next lab” note as a continuation of the lab flow that I
write on the board. On one hand, it is a good connection between the homework and material covered
in class: the students can start doing the homework while they still remember the lab and have an
opportunity to discuss it with their classmates and me. On the other hand, I am a little bit
concerned about the quality of their work when they are working so fast. I am still thinking.

As for my teaching side, writing the homework assignment helped me emphasize things in the lab flow
which students should focus on during the lab and which will help them later in their homework. This
approach definitely decreased the amount of questions about the type of the assignments; instead we
focus more on specific questions related to the homework’s content. In fact I have almost stopped
worrying about how well my students understand their homework assignments, not to mention the
decreasing of amount of emails with general questions. :-)

Also, I started thinking about what else I could put on the board to help me in class. Since I used
a projector very often for different information, I couldn’t have any notes displayed on the screen
for the duration of the lab. Also, I was worried that additional notes on the board might be
  unnecessary. So I started watching my explanations during the lab and marked (in my mind) the
  typical moments when I actually need to use the board.

It turned out that the most often I referred to the board when I needed a scheme explaining the
order of steps of an experiment: liquid from what tube goes to what tube, what we add to the tube,
etc. Another typical situation when I needed the board were group projects: dividing
responsibilities between groups and group members. Since then each time I am dealing with a complex
experiment or group work I use the remaining space to write what I think is important for the
current lab. I’ve found that besides saving time and organizing the work, these notes also provide
visual cues for students for understanding the guidelines in the lab manual, as well as seeing their
own impact in any team project.
